In previous research we used mixed methods, both ethnography (participatory observation and interviews) and data science (exploratory data analysis, regression models, natural language processing and geostatistics), with computational tools (Python, R, QGIS, Gephi). We collected and used sets of diverse data to find evidence of the progressive violence towards all social aspects of the daily life of the homeless population in the city of São Paulo. In this article we propose a novel approach that is not dependent on data, utilizing objective logical models to reinforce our previous work.

Agent-based Model (ABM) is a simulation conceived by Nobel prize winning Thomas Schelling, then called "Schelling's Model of Segregation". Similar to games such as "peg solitaire", Schelling developed a system with rational units, limited space and a set of rules, leading to logical outputs while having no prior hypothesis. It simulates much of our social behavior in urban spaces. It's counter-intuitive since it shows that you need only a small fraction of intolerant people between very tolerant ones to create whole spaces of segregation. Thus, it proves that the sum of individual rational choices can lead to irrational collective outcomes. Since the 70's, this discovery helped modern public policies of different municipalities worldwide to deal with vicious cycles of segregation and violence less prone to moral reasoning; furthermore, it is counter-intuitive as it can show that the most common moral reasoning could intensify the vicious cycle more than alleviate it.

From this approach we derived our own Agent-based Model to understand our object of study. We determined more agents with different rational choices (homeless people, property speculators, police, churches and social services), speculative spatial competition (price), inequality variable (income), different collective action variables (e.g., violent and non-violent).

Utilizing our baseline simulation model, containing only two agents (homeless people and property owners), we achieved a counter-intuitive output that shows no causality between homeless people and spatial degradation or devaluation; usually owners and renters move to affordable neighborhoods that become denser and thus richer in resources; once those become expensive and unaffordable they move to another neighborhood until the same demand and supply cycle is repeated. We posit that the homeless population seeks only services and resources needed to live and, in response, move together with other agents who lead the process of densification; homelessness, therefore, are not the cause of degradation or devaluation. As our baseline model leads to a stabilization and static outcome of the spatial segregation, we observed that when new variables are added, such as police violence, we obtain a system that is very unstable and dynamic, with recursive cycles of densification and degradation.

We hope this simulation can represent urban social inequality dynamics. We can push the debate about gentrification beyond the moral reasoning or culpability of one or another agent during this process and identify intuitive actions which, when taken, intensified our vicious cycle more than hindered it. We propose this as a step to focus on constructive solutions.

